Nay, but this dotage of ourgeneral's overflows the measure.
Those his goodly eyes that overthe files
and musters of the war haveglowed like plated Mars
now bend, now turn the officeand devotion
of their view upon a tawnyfront.
His captain's heart, which, inthe scuffles of great fights,
hath burst the buckles on hisbreast,
reneges all temper
and is become the bellows andthe fan to cool a gypsy's lust.
Here they come.
Take a good note,
and you will see in him, thetriple pillar of the world,
transformed into a strumpet'sfool.
If it be love indeed, tell mehow much.
There's beggary in the love thatcan be reckoned.
I'll set a bourn how far to bebeloved.
Then must thou needs find outnew heaven, new earth.
News, my good lord, from Rome.
Grates me: the sum.
Nay, hear them, Antony.
Fulvia perchance is angry,
or who knows if thescarce-bearded Caesar
have not sent his powerfulmandate to you?
"Do this or this.
"Take in that kingdom andenfranchise that.
Perform it, or else we damnthee."
Oh, my love.
Perchance nay and most like:
You must not stay here longer.
Your dismission is come fromCaesar.
Therefore, hear it, Antony.
Where's Fulvia's process?
Caesar's I would say? Both?
As I am Egypt's queen, thoublushest, Antony,
and that blood of thine isCaesar's homager.
Else so thy cheek pays shame
when shrill-tongued Fulviascolds.
The messengers.
Let Rome in Tiber melt
and the wide arch of the rangedempire fall.
Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay.
Our dungy earth alike feedsbeast as man.
The nobleness of life is to dothus.
When such a mutual pair and sucha twain can do it,
in which I bind on pain ofpunishment
the world to weet, we stand uppeerless.
Excellent falsehood.
Why, did he marry Fulvia and notlove her?
I'll seem the fool, I am not.
Antony will be himself.
But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now, for the love of love andher soft hours,
let's not confound the time withconference harsh.
There's not a minute of ourlives should stretch
without some pleasure now.
What sport tonight?
Hear the ambassadors.
Fie, wrangling queen,
whom everything becomes tochide, to laugh, to weep,
whose every passion fullystrives
to make itself in thee fair andadmired!
No messenger but thine.
And all alone tonight we'llwander through the streets
and note the qualities ofpeople.
Come, my queen.
Last night, you did desire it.Speak not to us.
Is Caesar with Antonius prizedso slight?
Sir, sometimes when he is notAntony,
he comes too short of that greatproperty,
which still should go withAntony.
I am full sorry he approves thecommon liar,
who thus speaks of him at Rome.
I'll have of better deedstomorrow.
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, mostanything Alexas,
almost most absolute Alexas,
where's the soothsayer
that you praised so to thequeen?
Soothsayer.
Your will?
Is this the man?
Is it you, sir, that knowthings?
In nature's infinite book ofsecrecy, a little I can read.
Show him your hand.
Good sir, give me good fortune.
I make not but foresee.
Pray, then, foresee me one.
You shall be yet far fairer thanyou are.
He means in flesh.
No, you shall paint when you'reold.
Wrinkles forbid!
Vex not his prescience; beattentive.
Hush.
You shall be more beloving thanbeloved.
I'd rather heat my liver withdrinking.
Nay, hear him.
Good now, some excellentfortune.
Let me be married to three kingsin a forenoon
and widow them all.
Find me to marry me withOctavius Caesar,
and companion me with mymistress.
You shall outlive the lady whomyou serve.
Excellent! I love long lifebetter than figs.
You have seen and proved afairer former fortune
than that which is to approach.
Prithee, how many boys andwenches must I have?
If every of your wishes had awomb
and fertile every wish, amillion.
Out, fool! I forgive thee for awitch.
You think none but your sheetsare privy to your wishes.
Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
We'll know all our fortunes.
Mine and most of our fortunestonight
shall be drunk to bed.
There's a palm presageschastity, if nothing else.
Even as the o'erflowing Niluspresageth famine?
Go, you wild bedfellow.
You cannot soothsay.
Prithee, tell her but aworky-day fortune.
Your fortunes are alike.
Oh, but how? But how?
Give me particulars.
I have said.
Am I not an inch of fortunebetter than she?
Well, if you were but an inch offortune better than I,
where would you choose it?
Not in my husband's nose.
Our worser thoughts heavensmend!
Alexas, come; his fortune, hisfortune.
Let him marry a woman thatcannot go,
sweet Isis, I beseech thee!
And let her die too and give hima worse.
And let worse follow worse,
till the worst of all follow himlaughing to his grave,
fifty-fold a cuckold!
Amen.
Dear goddess, hear that prayerof the people,
for as it is a heartbreaking
to see a handsome manloose-wived,
so it is a deadly sorrow
to behold a foul knaveuncuckolded.
Saw you my lord?
No, lady.
Was he not here?
No, madam.
He was disposed to mirth,
but on the sudden a Romanthought hath struck him.
Enobarbus!
Madam?
Seek him and bring him hither.
Where's Alexas?
Here, at your service.
My lord approaches.
We will not look upon him.
Go with us.
Fulvia, thy wife, first cameinto the field.
Against my brother Lucius?
Aye, but soon that war had end,
and the time's state madefriends of them,
jointing their force againstCaesar
whose better issue in the warfrom Italy
upon the first encounter dravethem.
Well, what worst?
The nature of bad news infectsthe teller.
When it concerns the fool orcoward.
On, things that are past aredone with me.
'Tis thus who tells me true,though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flattered.
Labienusó this is stiff newsó
hath with his Parthian forceextended Asia from Euphrates.
His conquering banner shook
from Syria to Lydia and toIonia, whilstó
Antony, thou wouldst sayó
Oh, my lord.
Speak to me home.
Mince not the general tongue.
Name Cleopatra as she is calledin Rome.
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase,
and taunt my faults with suchfull licence
as both truth and malice havepower to utter.
Then we bring forth weeds
when our quick minds lie still
and our ills told us is as ourearing.
Fare thee well awhile.
At your noble pleasure.
These strong Egyptian fetters Imust break
or lose myself in dotage.
What are you?
Fulvia, thy wife, is dead.
Where died she?
In Sicyon.
Her length of sickness with whatelse more serious
importeth thee to know, thisbears.
Forbear me.
There's a great spirit gone!
Thus did I desire it.
What our contempts doth oftenhurl from us,
we wish it ours again.
The present pleasure byrevolution
lowerings become the opposite ofitself.
She's good being gone.
The hand could pluck her backthat shoved her on.
I must from this enchantingqueen break off.
Ten thousand harms more than theills
that I know my idleness dothhatch.
How now. Enobarbus.
What's your pleasure, sir?
I must with haste from hence.
Why, then, we kill all ourwomen.
We see how mortal an unkindnessis to them.
If they suffer our departure,death's the word.
I must be gone.
Under a compelling occasion, letwomen die.
It were pity to cast them awayfor nothing.
Though between them and a greatcause,
they should be esteemed nothing.
Cleopatra, catching but theleast noise of this,
dies instantly.
I've seen her die twenty timesupon a far poorer moment.
I do think there is mettle indeath,
which commits some loving actupon her.
She hath such a celerity indying.
She is cunning past man'sthought.
Alack, sir, no.
Her passions are made of nothing
but the finest part of purelove.
We cannot call her winds andwaters, sighs and tears.
They are greater storms andtempests
than almanacs can report.
Would I had never seen her.
Oh, sir.
You had then left unseen awonderful piece of work,
which not to have been blestwithal
would have discredited yourtravel.
Fulvia is dead.
Sir?
Fulvia?
Dead!
Why, sir, give the gods athankful sacrifice.
When it pleaseth their deities
to take the wife of a man fromhim,
it shows to man the tailors ofthe earth,
comforting therein that when oldrobes are worn out,
there are members to make new.
If there were no more women butFulvia,
then had you indeed a cut andthe case to be lamented.
The tears live in an onion thatshould water this sorrow.
The business she hath broachedin the state
cannot endure my absence.
The business you have broachedhere
cannot be without you,
especially that of Cleopatra,
which wholly depends on yourabode.
No more light answers.
Let our officers have noticewhat we purpose.
I shall break the cause of ourexpedience to the queen
and get her leave to part.
For not alone the death ofFulvia
with more urgent touches dostrongly speak to us,
but the letters, too, of manyour contriving friends
in Rome petition us at home.
Sextus Pompeius hath given thedare to Caesar
and commands the empire of thesea.
Say our pleasure to such whoseplace is under us
requires our quick remove fromhence.
I shall do it.
Where is he?
See where he is,
who's with him, what he does.
I did not send you.
If you find him sad, say I amdancing.
If in mirth, report that I amsudden sick.
Quick and return.
Madam, methinks if you did lovehim dearly,
you do not hold the method toenforce the like from him.
What should I do, I do not?
In each thing, give him way.Cross him in nothing.
Thou teachest like a fool theway to lose him.
Tempt him not so too far, I wishforbear.
In time we hate that which weoften fear.
But here comes Antony.
I am sick and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing tomy purpose.
Help me away, dear Charmian; Ishall fall.
It cannot be thus long.
The sides of nature will notsustain it.
Now, my dearest queenó
Pray you, stand farther from me.
What's the matter?
I know by that same eye there'ssome good news.
What says the married woman?
You may go.
Would she had never given youleave to come!
Let her not say 'tis I that keepyou here.
I have no power upon you; hersyou are.
The gods best knowó
Oh, never was there a queen somightily betrayed.
Yet at the first, I saw thetreasons planted.
Cleopatraó
Why should I think you can bemine and true
though you in swearing shake thethroned gods
who have been false to Fulvia?
Most sweet queenó
Nay, pray you, seek no color foryour going
but bid farewell and go.
When you sued staying, then wasthe time for words.
No going then.
Eternity was in our lips andeyes,
bliss in our brows bent.
None our parts so poor but was arace of heaven.
They are so still.
Or thou, the greatest soldier ofthe world,
art turned the greatest liar.
How now, lady!
I would I had thy inches.
Thou shouldst know there were aheart in Egypt.
Hear me, queen.
The strong necessity of timecommands our services awhile,
but my full heart remains in usewith you.
Our Italy shines o'er with civilswords.
Sextus Pompeius makes hisapproaches to the port of Rome.
Equality of two domestic powersbreed scrupulous faction.
The hated, grown to strength,are newly grown to love.
My more particular
and that which most with youshould safe my going
is Fulvia's death.
Though age from folly could notgive me freedom,
it does from childishness.
Can Fulvia die?
She's dead, my queen.
Look here,
and at thy sovereign leisureread the garboils she awaked.
At the last best, see when andwhere she died.
O most false love!
Where be the sacred vials
thou shouldst fill withsorrowful water?
Now I see, I see in Fulvia'sdeath,
how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but be preparedto know the purposes I bear,
which are or cease as you shallgive the advice.
By the fire that quickens Nilus'slime,
I go from hence thy soldier,servant,
making peace or war as thouaffect'st.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come, butlet it be.
I am quickly ill and well, soAntony loves.
My precious queen, forbear,
and give true evidence to hislove,
which stands an honorable trial.
So Fulvia told me.
I prithee, turn aside and weepfor her,
then bid adieu to me and say thetears belong to Egypt.
Good now, play one scene ofexcellent dissembling
and let it look like perfecthonor.
You'll heat my blood no more.
You can do better yet, but thisis meetly.
I'll leave you, lady.
Courteous lord, one word, sir.
You and I must part.
Oh, that's not it.
Sir, you and I have loved, butthere's not it.
That you know well ,something itis I would.
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
and I am all forgotten.
But that your royalty holdsidleness your subject,
I should take you for idlenessitself.
Sir, forgive me.
Since my becomings kill me whenthey do not eye well to you.
Your honor calls you hence.
Therefore, be deaf to myunpitied folly,
and all the gods go with you.
Upon your sword sit laurelvictory,
and smooth success be strewedbefore your feet.
Let us go. Come.
Our separation so abides andflies
that thou residing here goes yetwith me,
and I, hence fleeting here,remain with thee.
Away.
You may see, Lepidus, andhenceforth know
it is not Caesar's natural viceto hate our great competitor.
From Alexandria, this is thenews.
He fishes, drinks, and wastesthe lamps of night in revel.
Is not more man-like thanCleopatra.
Nor the queen of Ptolemy morewomanly than he.
Hardly gave audience
or vouchsafed to think he hadpartners.
You shall find there a man whois the abstract
of all faults that all menfollow.
I must not think there are evilsenough to darken all hisgoodness.
His faults in him seem as thespots of heavenó
more fiery by night's blackness,
hereditary rather thanpurchased,
what he cannot change than whathe chooses.
You are too indulgent.
Let's grant, it is not amiss totumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
to give a kingdom for a mirth,
to sit and keep the turn oftippling with a slave,
to reel the streets at noon
and stand the buffet with knavesthat smell of sweat.
Say this becomes him.
As his composure must be rareindeed
whom these things cannotblemish,
yet must Antony no way excusehis foils
when we do bear so great weightin his lightness.
If he filled his vacancy withhis voluptuousness,
full surfeits and the dryness ofhis bones call on him for it.
But to confound such time thatdrums him from his sport
and speaks as loud as his ownstate and ours,
'tis to be chid
as we rate boys, who, beingmature in knowledge,
pawn their experience to theirpresent pleasure
and so rebel to judgment.
Here's more news.
Thy biddings have been done.
And every hour, most nobleCaesar,
shalt thou have report how 'tisabroad.
Pompey is strong at sea,
and it appears he is beloved bythose that only have fearedCaesar.
To the ports the discontentsrepair,
and men's reports give him muchwronged.
I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from theprimal state
that he which is was wisheduntil he were.
And the ebbed man, ne'er lovedtill ne'er worth love,
comes deared by being lacked.
This common body,
like to a vagabond flag upon thestream,
goes to and back, lackeying thevarying tide
to rot itself with motion.
Caesar, I bring thee word,
Menecrates and Menas, famouspirates,
make the sea serve them,
which they ear and wound withkeels of every kind.
Many hot inroads they make inItaly.
The borders maritime lack bloodto think on't
and flush youth revolt.
No vessel can peep forth, but'tis as soon taken as seen,
for Pompey's name strikes morethan could his war resisted.
Antony, leave thy lasciviouswassails.
When thou once was beaten fromModena,
where thou slewest Hirtius andPansa, consuls,
at thy heel did famine follow,
whom thou fought'st against,though daintily brought up,
with patience more than savagescould suffer.
Thou didst drink the stale ofhorses
and the gilded puddle whichbeasts would cough at.
Thy palate then did deign theroughest berry on the rudesthedge.
Yea, like the stag, when snowthe pasture sheets,
the barks of trees thou browsed.
On the Alps, it is reported thoudidst eat strange flesh,
which some did die to look on.
And all thisó
it wounds thine honor that Ispeak it nowó
was borne so like a soldier
that thy cheek so much as lankednot.
'Tis pity of him.
Let his shames quickly drive himto Rome.
'Tis time we twain did showourselves in the field.
To that end, assemble weimmediate council.
Pompey thrives in our idleness.
Tomorrow, Caesar, I shall befurnished to inform you rightly
both what by sea and land I canbe able to front this presenttime.
Till which encounter, it is mybusiness too. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord.
What you shall know of meantimestirs abroad,
I shall beseech you, sir, to letme be partaker.
Doubt not, sir; I knew it for mybond.
Charmian.
Madam?
Give me to drink mandragora.
Why, madam?
That I might sleep out thisgreat gap of time my Antony isaway.
You think of him too much.
O, 'tis treason.
Madam, I trust not so.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
What's your majesty pleasure?
Not now to hear thee sing.
I take no pleasure in aught aneunuch has.
Hast thou affections?
Yes, gracious madam.
Indeed!
Not in deed, madam, for I can donothing,
but what indeed is honest to bedone.
Yet have I fierce affections
and think what Venus did withMars.
O Charmian,
where think'st thou he is now?
Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk, or is he on hishorse?
O happy horse, to bear theweight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse, for wot'stthou whom thou movest?
The demi-Atlas of this earth,
the arm and burgonet of men.
He's speaking now
or murmuring, "Where's myserpent of old Nile?"ó
so he calls me.
Now I feed myself with mostdelicious poison.
Think on me,
that I am with Phoebus' amorouspinches black
and wrinkled deep in time.
Broad-fronted Caesar,
when thou wast here above theground,
I was a morsel for a monarch.
And great Pompey would stand
and make his eyes grow in mybrow.
There would he anchor his aspectand die
with looking on his life.
Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
How much unlike art thou MarkAntony.
Yet coming from him,
that great medicine hath withhis tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave MarkAntony?
Last thing he did, dear queen,
he kissedóthe last of manydoubled kissesó
this orient pearl.
His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
"Good friend," quoth he,
"say, the firm Roman to greatEgypt
"sends this treasure of anoyster
"at whose foot to mend the pettypresent,
"I will piece her opulent thronewith kingdoms.
All the east, say thou, shallcall her mistress."
What was he, sad or merry?
Like to the time of the year
between the extremes of hot andcold,
he was nor sad nor merry.
O well-divided disposition!
Note him; note him, goodCharmian.
'Tis the man, but note him.
He was not sad,
for he would shine on those thatmake their looks by his.
He was not merry, which seemedto tell them
his remembrance lay in Egyptwith his joy,
but between both.
O heavenly mingle!
Be'st thou sad or merry.
The violence of either theebecomes so does it no man else.
Met'st thou my posts?
Aye, madam, twenty severalmessengers.
Why do you send so thick?
Who's born that day when Iforget to send to Antony
shall die a beggar.
Ink and paper, Charmian.
Welcome, my good Alexas.
Did I, Charmian, ever loveCaesar so?
O that brave Caesar!
Be choked with such anotheremphasis!
Say the brave Antony.
The valiant Caesar!
By Isis, I will give thee bloodyteeth
if thou with Caesar paragonagain my man of men.
By your most gracious pardon,madam, I sing but after you.
My salad days when I was greenin judgment,
cold in blood to say as I saidthen!
But, come, away.
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day aseveral greeting,
or I'll unpeople Egypt.